KEP:3466: Kubernetes Component Health SLIs (#3469)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-instrumentation/3466-healthcheck-metrics/README.md

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP intends to allow us to emit health check data in a structured and consistent way,
so that monitoring agents can consume healthz/livez/readyz data and create SLOs/alerts off
of these inputs.

## Motivation

Healthchecking data is currently surfaced in unstructured format and is scraped by monitoring
agents (as well as the kubelet), which must be configured to interpret the health data and

> to act upon it. This process does not lend itself readily to the creation of availability SLOs,

Reviewer: maybe move the SLO and SLI term definition to this paragraph, since it's the first use?

Author: done.

since we basically require an outside agent to parse the health endpoint and convert this signal
into an SLI. 

### Goals

- Create a uniform interface by which we can consume health checking information
- Allow availability SLIs to be created without a specialized monitoring agent

> - Allow for increased granularity (by configuring a smaller scrape interval) of health check metric data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allow for increased granularity (by configuring a more frequent interval) of health check metric data
```

?

- Minimize the diff involved for each Kubernetes component

### Non-Goals

- Creation of SLOs are out of scope. This KEP specifically targets the creation of signals which can be used as SLIs.

## Proposal

We are proposing to add a new endpoint on Kubernetes components `/metrics/health` which returns
health check data in prometheus format.

### Risks and Mitigations

This is a separate endpoint, it does not have to be used. The risk of adding metrics is generally cardinality, but in this
case we are proposing known dimensions to the metrics, specifically:

1. status - one of `Success`, `Error`, `Pending`
1. type - one of `livez`, `readyz`, `healthz`
1. name - the known name of the health check. AFAIK, these are all static strings in the Kubernetes codebase, therefore bounded in cardinality

## Design Details

> We will write the actual metric data in the healthz/livez/readyz paths and expose this in our new

Reviewer: I think you're trying to say that it will call the existing healthz/livez/readyz code paths (or hit the pages?), convert that data into metric form, and serve it?

Reviewer: Or are you trying to say that when those pages are called, you'll cache the result?

Reviewer: Ah, I think you are trying to say, "When healthz/livez/readyz paths are accessed (not on a timer), they will record whatever they return in a gauge metric."

Author: Yeah that's what I was trying to say. Lemme rephrase it.

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Reviewer: OK now I understand. I think you should do something to cap the staleness. Otherwise there's a surprising dependency where your metric shows "healthy" forever if whatever is calling healthz breaks.

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Author: You record the metric when the health endpoint is hit, but you scrape it independently of when the health endpoint is hit. By default kubelet health check intervals are 10s. If you scrape the metrics endpoint every 5s, you are scraping some stale data.

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Reviewer: That's assuming kubelet is being used and doesn't go AWOL. I think you need something to cap the worst case staleness. Or at least make it visible (add it to the metric).

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Author: We expose both a gauge and a counter, so they can be used in conjunction to determine staleness.

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Author: If the counter stops incrementing, you can alert. Otherwise, you can rely on the gauge.

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Reviewer: OK, that sounds fine (and would be good to say in the text)

> metrics endpoint. Admittedly, this has the downside of staleness though, since the health check 

Author: done.

data can be as stale as the length of the kubelet scrape interval. However, given our e2e tests 
configure [apiserver to 1s intervals](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/cluster/gce/manifests/kube-apiserver.manifest#L58), it is reasonable to assume that other cloud-providers 
likely configure similar small scrape intervals, which means staleness should not realistically 
be much of an issue. 

> We considered fetching metric data when the metrics endpoint was hit, but this would introduce 

Reviewer: I didn't understand what the design even was until I got to this line :)

extra load against the health endpoint, which we took care to avoid. Alternatively, we considered
periodic polling of the metrics endpoint such that the metrics would be incremented only during this
periodic poll, but that change would be larger and would need to be implemented in each component
for each of their health check endpoints. 

> Using a gaugeFunc would also preclude making the metric `stable`, since gaugeFuncs are

Author: We want these to be stable metrics, so we can't use gaugefuncs.

> Using a gaugeFunc would also preclude making the metric `stable`, since gaugeFuncs are

Author: Amended accordingly.

> Using a gaugeFunc would also preclude making the metric `stable`, since gaugeFuncs are

Reviewer: That's much clearer phrasing :)
